---
layout: post
category : paper
tags : [paper, ontology, biodiversity]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

## Title

`rbefdata` - leveraging access to data and semantics

## Abstract

Today ecologists face a deluge of data like in many other disciplines. This
puts much pressure on the development of tools that foster the preservation of
data as well as the exploration and reuse of available data. Many tools and
concepts available in data management provide solutions to different parts of
the data life cycle. However not all of them are widely spread or accepted
throughout ecology. This situation can be improved by the tight integration of
data management concepts into existing and widely used software and thus into
the daily workflow of researchers. Paper proposals and data provenance as ways
to promote the discussion of ideas and collaborations, metadata to improve data
preservation and information exchange as well as the integration of semantic
resources to enhance data exploration and processing. These represent only a
few examples of valuable concepts with the potential to improve the progress of
a data intensive scientific domain like ecology.

In this paper we introduce the `rbefdata` package that provides the R
statistics environment with access to the open source data management platform
`BEFdata`. The R package leverages access to data and metadata, includes the
integration of a semantic repository and offers preservation functionality for
datasets and other data products like free format attachment files. We showcase
the functionality of the R package and the interactions with the data
management platform using an R script workflow. It pulls and analyses data
associated with a paper proposal from the `BEFdata` instance of the BEF-China
experiment. The analysis in the workflow deals with N retention along a
biodiversity gradient. The results of the analysis itself have been published
already and thus the data used here is open access. This makes the workflow
script presented, fully reproducible by executing the script step by step. We
discuss the introduced R package and the combination of software in terms of
the data life cycle and the current data management requirements in ecology as
well as we given an outlook on upcoming features of `rbefdata` and `BEFdata`.

## Introduction

With a growing awareness on the value of data, many data management platforms
have been developed that preserve all kinds of environmental and historic data.
These provide data preservation plans for small scale projects as well as for
large scale, big data producing, long term or remote sensing collaborations
(e.g. diversity workbench, `BEFdata`, DataONE, LifeWatch). An ongoing trend in
data preservation and accessibility is the development of integrative databases
or data portals (TRY, GBIF). They serve as nodes that collect data from smaller
databases of a certain domain and enable researchers to access a wide range of
relevant data, all from one place. All these platforms offer a solution to one
of the most pressing problems that we face with our valuable data today, their
loss (cite xxx). Even tough this improves the situation in data preservation,
there is still reluctance of researchers to use online data platforms as they
fear to give away and loose the control over their data (cite xxx).

The demand to reuse the available data grows with the amount of data available.
In ecology for example the reuse of data is of particular interest as the
integration of data offers the potential to answer questions on a much broader
temporal and spatial scale (cite xxx). A problem on data reuse is that
available data is often not well described. Metadata solves this problem and
gives researchers the opportunity to describe their data and others to
understand raw research data even if they are not familiar with it. Metadata is
necessary as plain primary research data can be hard to understand, and even
hard to decipher by the authors themselves after some time has passed. For
example it is hard to remember what methods have been used to collect the data
of a certain column or what the abbreviations and the headers in the dataset
mean. However metadata is still not used extensively as it usually means more
to put more time into data and to learn new tools that help to describe (e.g
morpho, dataUP).

To find relevant data for reuse is a challenging task that is getting even more
complex when more data gets available. A common practice in data discovery,
next to full text search in metadata, is tagging with keywords and the linking
of data using ontologies. However a keyword search can be very coarse as it may
provide access to a set of data but misses other essential and relevant data
tagged with close related keywords.  For example a keyword search on "weight"
of leaves will miss datasets tagged only with "dry weight" or "wet weight" that
might be of interest as well. The integration of semantic repositories that
provide taxonomies or ontologies can potentially improve the situation here.
These repositories can embed the keywords into a hierarchical or network
structure and so the query can be extended along known relations of the search
term.

Before data can effectively be reused it may needs to be cleaned, imputed,
reshaped and merged. This usually takes up to 70% of an analysis script (cite
Karin and me, and xxx). These preparatory steps are not only time and labour
intensive but also potentially error prone, especially if the amount and
complexity of data to be included increases. The integration of semantic
repositories that provide ontologies can help to solve these problems. As
ontologies allow the machine readable access to knowledge of a scientific
domain they can be used to model develop tools that "understand" the contents
of datasets and guide researchers on the process of data preparation. However
the development of ontologies especially for a research domain like ecology is
challenging. It is characterized by interdisciplinary interactions which leads
to a wide heterogeneous landscape of knowledge that would need to be covered
and formalized by the ontology.

Metadata as well as the concept of paper proposals can reduce the barrier to
data sharing and foster collaboration (cite Karin). While metadata allows an
insight into raw data without the need to give the data away, paper proposals
can serve as tool to discuss research ideas based on the metadata available.
The integration of semantic repositories potentially improves not only the
discovery of data but also assists researchers with the preparation of data on
reuse. A trending concept to streamline the processing of data is workflows.
They enable the access to data and metadata, the manipulation and analysis of
data as well as the preservation of valuable data products. The Kepler (cite
xxx) and the Pegasus (cite xxx) software are only two examples of software that
implement the workflow concept. However there is still demand on tools that
integrate a full set of data management concepts into widely accepted and
commonly used analysis software like R.

We here introduce the `rbefdata` R package as companion to the open source data
management platform `BEFdata` (cite Karin). The package is part of the rOpenSci
(http://ropensci.org/) initiative which is a community driven project to
provide the R statistics environment (cite R) with a flexible access to
scientific data repositories. The R package enables access to data and metadata
stored on `BEFdata`, integrates semantic repositories stored on `tematres`
vocabulary servers (http://www.vocabularyserver.com/) and provides data
preservation functionality for raw research data as well as for free format
attachments files. We showcase the functionality of the `rbefdata` package
available with version 0.3.5. We create a workflow in form of an R script that
shows the semantic refinement of keywords to improve the dataset search, the
use of metadata, how to pull a complete set of data from a paper proposal into
the R environment, and finally the upload of data products. The workflow is
created along an analysis about N retention in the BEF-China experiment. The
results of the analysis have been published already and the data is open access
(Lang et al. 2013) which makes the workflow shown here simply reproducible.

## Material and Methods

### BEF-China

The BEF (Biodiversity Ecosystem Functioning) - China project is a research
collaboration consisting of 10-15 independent research groups, whose
overarching aim is to disentangle the role of tree and shrub diversity for
production, erosion control, element cycling, and species conservation in
Chinese subtropical forest ecosystems. The BEF-China project (www.bef-china.de)
is funded by the German Science Foundation (DFG, FOR 891). It uses two main
research platforms located in the provinces Jiangxi and Zhejiang in China
(Bruelheide et al., 2012).

### BEFdata platform

The [BEFdata](http://befdataproduction.biow.uni-leipzig.de/) platform is
specialized in the management of small and heterogeneous data. It offers data
harmonization features, adheres to standards like the Ecological Metadata
Language (EML) and fosters the exploration of data by keyword tagging.
Additionally the platform facilitates research cooperations by a paper proposal
tool. To create a paper proposal a researcher can select datasets on the
platform which are to be included in an analysis.  Furthermore basic
information like a title, a rationale, the envisaged journal and a date needs
to be provided. Submitting a proposal, a researcher asks for access to the data
and proposes his research idea to the project board and the data owners.

The data owners get informed and can decide if and how they like to participate
in the upcoming analysis or if they only like to get acknowledged for providing
their data (cite Karin). This process allows to include or acknowledge all
researchers involved in the data sampling process, it promotes collaborations
between research units and helps to avoid duplication in publication
initiatives on the same research ideas which adds to the transparency of data
publication. Finally the datasets assembled in a paper proposal can be imported
in one step to the R environment by the `rbefdata` package.

### The analysis: Nutrient retention along a biodiversity gradient

We use an analysis about N retention along biodiversity gradient in the
BEF-China experiment as a use case. We build a script based that shows the
functionalities and inter linkages between the BEF-China data platform and the
`rbefdata` package. The analysis is typical for interdisciplinary research in
ecology, as it combines soil, taxon, and nutrient data where data originating
from field campaigns of different collaborating laboratories has to be merged
prior to analyses. A paper proposal based on 3 datasets with the title "Mixed
afforestations of young subtropical trees promote nitrogen acquisition and
retention" has been created. The rationale given for the paper proposal is:

'Knowledge of biodiversity effects on nutrient cycling patterns in subtropical
forest ecosystems is still very limited, particularly as regards macro
nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus. Experimental approaches using tree
saplings may promote an understanding of mechanisms that underlie nutrient
acquisition and cycling in early successional stages of secondary forests and
forest plantations. Insights in the potential of nutrient retention of young
tree plantations are of particular interest in China, where large areas have
been reforested in order to counteract soil erosion and to increase the soils’
water and nutrient retention capacity. In this study we planted saplings of
four abundant early successional (evergreen and deciduous) tree species in
monoculture, two- and four-species combination to test the effect of species
richness on nitrogen acquisition and retention by using a 15N tracer
experiment. A crucial question in BEF research is the appropriate time scale of
experiments which allows species richness effects to emerge. This question
gains importance when long-lived and slowly growing organisms such as trees are
considered. We wanted to analyse whether species richness effects occur during
the establishment phase of early successional tree species typical of
subtropical forests of China.  More precisely we wanted to test the following
hypotheses: (H1) Nitrogen acquisition and retention increases with species
richness due complementary effects in species mixtures. (H2) Species richness
effects strengthen over time.' The respective proposal can be assessed under
(url). For a detailed description of the experimental design we refer to Lang
et al. 2013

### Tematres

The `tematres` vocabulary server can hold different representations of formal
knowledge like thesauri, taxonomies or ontologies. The `rbefdata` package
integrates the vocabulary of the BEF-China experiment stored on a `tematres`
server. It  provides relations of terms that can be used to improve the search
of relevant data for an analysis. The `befdata` packages uses the `rtematres` R
package to exploit the vocabulary server.

### rbefdata

`rbefdata` (GitHub: https://github.com/befdata/befdata) is the companion
package to the open source data management platform `BEFdata`. The latest
stable version of `rbefdata` can be installed via the CRAN package repository.
It is part of the rOpenSci initiative (http://ropensci.org/) which aims to
provide the R statistics environment with packages that enable access to
scientific data repositories. Basically the `rbefdata` package enables access
to data and the corresponding metadata stored on a `BEFdata` platform as well
as it allows the upload of data products. The integration of a `tematres`
vocabulary server allows for an improved exploration of datasets. By default it
integrates the `tematres` server but this can be changed by the package
options.

## Example workflow

### Setup `rbefdata`

The latest version of `rbefdata` is installed by the `install.packages()`
command. After the installation the package needs to be loaded into the working
environment with the `require()` (see box below).


```
# load the package
require(rbefdata)

# list all options
bef.options()
```

```
## $url
## [1] "http://china.befdata.biow.uni-leipzig.de"
##
## $tematres_url
## [1] "http://tematres.befdata.biow.uni-leipzig.de/vocab/index.php"
##
## $tematres_service_url
## [1] "http://tematres.befdata.biow.uni-leipzig.de/vocab/services.php"
##
## $download_dir
## [1] "downloads"
##
## $user_credentials
## [1] ""
```


After that the options of the `rbefdata` package need to be set via the
`bef.options()` command.  A look into the options list reveals several fields
that can be filled in. The most essential setting for the example workflow we
present here is the user credentials. These are used to authenticate the user
against the platform and to ensure the access to the data has been granted as
well as to log the data access. We need to set it as the data is not yet open
access at the time of writing. When it will be open access in the near future,
a key is no longer required to download the data.

Other options are the URLs to the `BEFdata` server instance and the `tematres`
vocabulary server as well as a field that stores the name of a download folder.
While the URL fields ensure the package communicates with the right servers the
download folder name is used to create a folder in case we download attached
files from a dataset or proposal. In our case there is no need to change the
URL to `BEFdata` server, as it defaults to the BEF-China instance that we use
to retrieve data from. If an own instance of the `BEFdata` platform or has been
set up, this URL needs to be changed so the package communicates with the right
server (see box below).
